[Music]
once upon a time the world was a big
dysfunctional family it was run by the
great and powerful parents and the
people were helpless and hopeless
naughty children if any of the more
rowdier children questioned the
authority of the parents they were
scolded if they went exploring into the
parents rooms or even into the secret
filing cabinets they were punished and
told that for their own good they must
never go in there again then one day a
man came to town with boxes and boxes of
secret documents stolen from the parents
rooms look what they've been hiding from
you he said the children looked and were
amazed there were maps and minutes for
meetings where the parents were slugging
each other off they behaved just like
the children and they made mistakes too
just like the children the only
difference was their mistakes were in
the secret filing cabinets well there
was a girl in the town and she didn't
think they should be in the secret
filing cabinets or if they were there
ought to be a law to allow the children
access and so she said about to make it
so well I'm a girl in that story and the
secret documents that I was interested
in were located in this building in the
British Parliament and the data that I
wanted to get my hands on were the
expense receipts of members of
parliament I thought this was a basic
question to ask in a democracy
I wasn't like I was asking for the code
to a nuclear bunker or anything like
that but the amount of resistance I got
from this Freedom of Information request
you would have thought I'd asked
something like this so I fought for
about five years doing this and it was
it was one of many hundreds of requests
that I made not I didn't pay look I
didn't set out honestly to revolutionize
the British Parliament that was not my
intention I was just making these
requests as part of research for my
first book but it ended up in this very
long protracted legal battle and there I
was after five years fighting against
Parliament in front of three of
Britain's most eminent High Court judges
waiting for their ruling about whether
or not Parliament had to release this
data and I've got to tell you I wasn't
that hopeful because I'd seen the
establishment I thought it always sticks
together I am out of luck well guess
what I won hooray well that's not
exactly the story because the problem
was that Parliament delayed and delayed
releasing that data and then they tried
to retrospectively change the law so
that it would no longer apply to them
the transparency law they passed earlier
that applied to everybody else they
tried to keep it so it didn't apply to
them what they hadn't counted on was
digitization because that meant that all
those paper receipts had been scanned in
electronically and it was very easy for
somebody to just copy that entire
database put it on a disk and then just
saunter outside of Parliament which they
did and then they shopped that disk to
the highest bidder which was the Daily
Telegraph and then you all remember
there was weeks and weeks of revelations
everything from porn movies and bass
plugs and new kitchens and mortgages
that had never been paid off the end
result was six ministers resigned the
first Speaker of the House and three
hundred years was forced to resign a new
government was elected on a mandate of
transparency 120 MPs stepped down at
that election and so far four MPs and
two Lords have done
time for fraud well I tell you that
story because it wasn't unique to
Britain it was an example of a culture
clash that's happening all over the
world between the wigged and be
stockinged officials who think that they
can rule over us without very much
prying from the public and then suddenly
confronted with a public who is no
longer content with that arrangement and
not only not content with it now more
often armed with official data itself so
we are moving to this democratization of
information and I've been in this field
for quite a while slightly embarrassing
admission even when I was a kid I used
to have these little spy books and I
would like see what everybody was doing
in my neighborhood and log it down and I
think that was a pretty good indication
about my future career as an
investigative journalist and what I've
seen from from being in this access to
information field for so long is that it
used to be quite a niche a niche
interest and it's gone mainstream
everybody increasingly around the world
wants to know about what people in power
are doing they want to say in decisions
that are made in their name and with
their money it's this democratization of
information that I think is an
information enlightenment and it has
many of the same principles of the first
enlightenment it's about searching for
the truth not because somebody says it's
true because I say so
no it's about trying to find the truth
based on what you can see and what can
be tested that in the first
enlightenment led to questions about the
right of Kings the Divine Right of Kings
to rule over people or that women should
be subordinate to men or that the church
was the official Word of God
obviously the church weren't very happy
about this and they tried to suppress it
but what they hadn't counted on was
technology and then they had the
printing press which suddenly enabled
these ideas to spread cheaply far and
fast and people would come together in
coffee houses discuss the ideas plot
revolution in our day we have
digitization that strips all the
physical mass out of information so now
it's
most zero-cost to copy and share
information our printing presses the
internet our coffee houses our social
networks we're moving to what I would
think of as a fully connected system and
we have global decisions to make in the
system decisions about climate about
finance systems about resources and
think about it if we want to make an
important decision about buying a house
we don't just go off I mean I don't know
about you but I want to see a lot of
houses before I put that much money into
it and if we're thinking about a finance
system we need a lot of information to
take in it's just not possible for one
person to take in the amount of volume
of information and analyze it to make
good decisions so that's why we're
seeing increasingly this demand for
access to information that's why we're
starting to see more disclosure laws
come out so for example the environment
there's the R whose Convention which is
a European directive that gives people a
very strong right to know so if your
water company is dumping water into your
River sewage water into your river you
have a right to know about it in the
finance industry you now have more of a
right to know about what's going on so
we have different anti-bribery laws many
regulations increased corporate
disclosures so you can now track assets
across borders and it's getting harder
to hide assets tax avoidance pay
inequality so that's great we're
starting to find out more and more about
these systems and they're all moving to
the central system this fully connected
system all of them except one can you
guess which one it's the system which
underpins all these other systems it's
the system by which we organize and
exercise power and there I'm talking
about politics because in politics we're
back to this system that's top-down
hierarchy and how is it possible that
the volume of information can be
processed that needs to in this system
well it just can't that's it and I think
this is largely what's behind the crisis
of legitimacy in our in our different
governments right now so I've told you a
bit about what I did to try and drag
Parliament
kicking and screaming into the 21st
century and I'm just gonna give you a
couple of examples of what a few other
people I know are doing so this is a guy
called Seb bacon he's a computer
programmer and he built a site called a
lava telle and what it is it's a freedom
of information platform it's open source
with documentation and it allows you to
make a Freedom of Information request to
ask your public body a question so it
takes all the hassle out of it and I can
tell you that there is a lot of hassle
making these requests so it takes all
that hassle out and you just type in
your question for example how many
police officers have a criminal record
it zooms it off to the appropriate
person it tells me when the time limit
is coming to an end it keeps track of
all the correspondence it posts it up
there and it becomes an archive of
public knowledge so that's open source
and it can be used in any country where
there is some kind of Freedom of
Information Law so there's a list there
of the different countries that have it
and then there's a few more coming on
board so if any of you out there like
the sound of that and have it law like
that in your country I know that said
would love to hear from you about
collaborating and getting that into your
country
this is Brigitta yong stud here she's an
Icelandic MP and quite an unusual MP in
Iceland she was one of the protesters
who was outside of parliament when when
the country's economy collapsed and then
she was elected either on a reform
mandate and she's now spearheading this
project it's the Icelandic modern media
initiatives and it just got funding to
make it an international modern media
project and this is taking all of the
best laws around the world about freedom
of expression protection of
whistleblowers protection from liable
source protection and trying to make
Iceland a publishing haven it's a place
where your data can be free so when we
think about increasingly how governments
want to access user data what they're
trying to do a nice and is make this
safe haven where it can happen in my own
field of investigative journalism we're
also having this
thinking globally so this is a site
called investigative dashboard and if
you're trying to track a dictators asset
for example Hosni Mubarak
you know he's just funneling out cash
from his country when he knows he's in
trouble and what you want to do to
investigate that is you need to have
access to all of the world's as many as
you can companies house registrations
databases so this is a website that
tries to agglomerate all of those
databases into one place that you can
start searching for you know his
relatives his friends the head of his
security services you can try and find
out how he's moving our assets from that
country but again when it comes to the
decisions which are impacting us the
most perhaps the most important
decisions that are being made about war
and so forth again we can't just make a
Freedom of Information request it's
really difficult so we're still having
to rely on illegitimate ways of getting
information through leaks so when the
Guardian did this investigation about
the Afghan war you know they can't walk
into the Department of Defense and and
ask for all the information it's not
going to get it so this came from leaks
of tens of thousands of dispatchers that
were written by American soldiers about
the Afghan war and leaked and then
they're able to do this investigation
another rather large investigation is
around world diplomacy again this is all
based around leaks 250 one thousand US
diplomatic cables and I was involved in
this investigation because I got this
leak through a leak from a disgruntled
wiki leak ER and ended up going to work
at the Guardian so I can tell you
firsthand what it was like to have
access to this leak it was amazing I
mean it was amazing it reminded me of
that scene in The Wizard of Oz you know
what I mean where the little dog Toto
runs across to where the wizard and he
pulls back the dogs pulling back the
curtain and don't look behind the screen
don't look at the man behind the screen
it was just like that because what you
started to see is that all these grand
statesmen these very pompous politicians
they were just like us they all bitched
about
each other I mean quite gossipy those
cables okay but I thought it was a very
important point for all of us to grasp
these are human beings just like us they
don't have special powers they're not
magic they are not our parents
beyond that what I found most
fascinating was the level of endemic
corruption that I saw across all
different countries and and particularly
centered around the heart of power
around public officials who were
embezzling the public's money for their
own personal enrichment and allowed to
do that because of official secrecy so
I've mentioned WikiLeaks because surely
what could be more open than publishing
all the material because that is what
Julian Assange staged he wasn't content
with the way the newspapers published it
to be safe and legal he threw it all out
there that did end up with vulnerable
people in Afghanistan being exposed it
also meant that the Belarusian dictator
was given a handy list of all the
pro-democracy campaigners in that
country who had spoken to the US
government is that radical openness I I
say it's not because for me what it
means
it doesn't mean abdicating power
responsibility accountability it's
actually being a partner with power it's
about sharing responsibility sharing
accountability also the fact that he
threatened to sue me because I got a
leak of his leaks I thought that showed
a remarkable sort of inconsistency in
ideology to be honest as well the other
thing is that power is incredibly
seductive and you must have two real
qualities I think when you come to the
table when you're dealing with power
talking about power because of its
seductive capacity you've got to have
skepticism and humility skepticism
because you must always be challenging I
want to see why do you just say so
that's not good enough I want to see the
evidence behind why that's so and
humility because we are all human we all
make mistakes and if you don't have
skepticism and humility then it's a
really short journey to go from reformer
to autocrat and I think you only have to
read
farm to get that message about how power
corrupts people so what is the solution
it is I believe to embody within the
rule of law rights to information at the
moment our rights are incredibly weak in
a lot of countries we have Official
Secrets Act including in Britain here we
have an official secrets act with no
public interest test so that means it's
a crime people are punished quite
severely in a lot of cases for
publishing or giving away official
information now wouldn't it be amazing
and really this is what I want all of
you to think about if we had an official
disclosure act where officials were
punished if they were found to have
suppressed or hidden information that
was in the public interest so that yes
yes my counterpose I would like this to
work towards that so it's not all bad
news I mean there definitely is is
progress on the line but I think what we
find is that the closer that we get
right into the heart of power the more
opaque closed it becomes so it was only
just the other week that I heard
London's Metropolitan Police
Commissioner talking about why the
police need access to all of our
communications spying on us without any
judicial oversight and he said it was a
matter of life and death he actually
said that it was a matter of life and
death there was no evidence he presented
no evidence of that it was just because
I say so you have to trust me
take it on faith well I'm sorry people
but we are back to the pre enlightenment
Church and we need to fight against that
so he was talking about the law in
Britain which is the communications data
bill an absolutely outrageous piece of
legislation in America you have the
Cyber Intelligence Sharing and
Protection Act
you've got drones now be considered for
domestic surveillance you have the
National Security Agency building the
world's giantest
spy Center it's just
color is five times bigger than the US
Capitol in which they're going to
intercept and analyze communications
traffic and personal data to try and
figure out who's the troublemaker
in society what to go back to our
original story the parents have panicked
they've locked all the doors
they've kitted out the house with CCTV
cameras they're watching all of us
they've dug a basement and they built a
spy Center to try and run algorithms and
figure out which ones of us are
troublesome and if any of us complain
about that were arrested for terrorism
well is that a fairy tale or a living
nightmare some fairy tales have happy
endings some don't I think we've all
read the Grimm's fairy tales which are
indeed very grim but the world isn't a
fairy tale and it could be more brutal
than we want to acknowledge equally it
could be better than we've been led to
believe but either way we have to start
seeing it exactly as it is with all of
its problems because it's only by seeing
it with all of its problems they'll be
able to fix them and live in a world in
which we can all be happily ever after
thank you very much
[Applause]
[Music]